# SCI Walkthrough - Part 1

So far we have focussed on computing the impact `carbon`. In the previous module we learned about the `SCI` specification, in terms of Impact Framework `SCI` is an impact. 

In this module we will continue with our worked example but transform the impact from `carbon` to `sci`.

## IOMI

As should be fairly standard now, our process starts with **IOMI**.

1. **Impacts**: What impact(s) do you want to compute?
2. **Observations**: What observation(s) can you gather that *could* be induced to that impact?
3. **Methodology**: What methodology will you select for inducing the observation(s), into the impact(s)?
4. **Implementation**: Implementation of the methodology as a pipeline of plugins.

## Impacts

In this specific case this server is serving a website and the `SCI` score we want to calculate is `Carbon per Visit`.

As a reminder, the SCI score is calculated as follows:

```mathematica
SCI = (E * I + M) / R
```

- `E` is operational energy
- `I` is carbon intensity
- `M` is embodied carbon
- `R` is the functional unit, in this case `site-visits`

Read more https://sci-guide.greensoftware.foundation/

In the SCI specification `(E * I)` is often expressed as simply `O`, operational carbon, like so:

```mathematica
SCI = (O + M) / R
```

- `O` is operational carbon
- `M` is embodied carbon
- `R` is the functional unit.

So the impact property we want to compute is simply `sci` but in order to compute that we also need to gather observations which help us to compute `operational-energy`, `operational-embodied` and `carbon-intensity` and we will aslo need to source some observations so we can compute the function unit of **visits**.

### Dependancy Tree

Let's start building up our dependancy tree which help us determine the **right** methodology to calcualte our impacts.


sci
- operational-energy
  - memory-energy
  - cpu-energy
    - cpu-utilization
    - cpu-tdp
- embodied-carbon
  - server-vcpus
  - server-vcpus
- carbon-intensity
  - cloud-region

sci
- operational-carbon
  - operational-energy
  - carbon-intensity
- embodied-carbon
- functional-unit(site-visits)

Next up, let's explore the observations we can gather as well as if there is a common methodology to turn them into the impacts we need.


### Boilerplate

Let's start with creating the boilerplate manifest file we will continue to flesh out.

```yaml
name: sci-walkthrough
description: This manifest file computes the carbon per visit for our website
initialize:
  plugins:
tree:
  children:
    server-1:
      defaults:
      pipeline:
      inputs:
```

## Observations

### Functional Unit

In order to compute an SCI score of carbon per visit, we need to first compute the total carbon and then divide by the number of visits. 

This example is fairly straightforward since our website uses Google Analytics, and looking at the dashboard we can see that there is a field called visits, and on the day of question the visits was `550`.

So let's add the first observation to our component:

```yaml
server-1:
    defaults:
    pipeline:
    inputs:
    - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
      duration: 3600      
      # highlight-next-line
      site-visits: 550
```

## Operational Energy

From the SCI equation it's clear we need to calculate operational energy, the `E` in the equation.

In the previous modules we assumed the dashboard of our cloud provider gave us energy, but this unfortunatey is very unlikely so instead we need to look for a proxy metric that we can induce *into* energy.

Regardless the hosting provider most people will be able to get detailed data regarding the CPU utilizatiopn and there is a common methodology for computing energy from cpu utilization which we will cover later.

Some other observations we have is that our server is running on the **Azure** cloud platform, the instance type is **Standard_A2m_v2** and it's in the region **West UK**.

As well as the CPU we also want to measure the energy consumption from memory, so similar to the previous module we will also gather **memory utilization** from our hosting providers monitoring dashboard.

So all together all the observations we can gather about our software is:

```yaml
server-1:
    defaults:
    pipeline:
    inputs:
    - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
      duration: 3600      
      site-visits: 550
      # highlight-start
      cpu-utilization: 80
      memory-utilization: 8      
      # highlight-end
```

### Carbon Intensity

In previous modules since we were using an average value we manually looked it up and hardcoded using using a Coeefficient plugin. A better methodology would be to treat it as an observation since it could change over time and for different components of your software system.

The carbon intensity of electricity is based on the region, one useful observation we can gather for our server is that it's based in the West UK region in Azure. 

> [!TIP]
> The recommended approach is to use a plugin such as the [WattTime plugin](https://github.com/WattTime/gsf-if-plugin) which if added to the pipeline uses the WattTime API to source the right carbon intensity values from their database for a given region and time.

Let's add this to our observation, since we don't expect the region of our server to change across time we will simply add this to the `defaults` whcih are automatically copied to the inputs for every timestep, like so:

```yaml
server-1:
    defaults:
      # highlight-start
      cloud-region: West UK
      # highlight-end    
    pipeline:
    inputs:
    - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
      duration: 3600      
      site-visits: 550
      cpu-utilization: 80
      memory-utilization: 8      
```

### Embodied Carbon

Embodied carbon is an impact that is often far harder to source from your hosting provider than energy, so this will likely be the hardest data to source and most likely will have to be modeled and estimated. 

Since the embodied carbon is associated with the hardware the software is running on, we need some observations which give us details regarding the hardware.

For this case we know the server is running on the Microsoft **Azure** cloud platform and the server instance we are specifically using is called **Standard A2m_v2** in the Azure ecosystem.

Let's add those to our observation, again since we don't expect these values to change across time we will simply add them to `defaults`, like so:

```yaml
server-1:
    defaults:
      cloud-region: West UK    
      # highlight-start
      cloud-instance: "Standard_A2m_v2"
      cloud-provider: Azure      
      # highlight-end    
    pipeline:
    inputs:
    - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
      duration: 3600      
      site-visits: 550
      cpu-utilization: 80
      memory-utilization: 8      
```


## Methodology

Next up let's explore the different methodologies for how to induce those impacts into our SCI score.




### CPU Utilization -> Operational Energy

In previous modules, we've covered how to estimate energy consumption from memory utilization using a simple coefficient.

However, estimating energy from **CPU utilization** is more complex since it's a non-linear relationship between cpu utilization and energy. This relatioship is called a power curve. Every single CPU on the market today has a different power curve, to make things even more complex the power curve is different depending on what types of applications you are running on the CPU and to make matters even more complex, they can also change depending on how you configure the CPUs BIOS settings.

**TODO - DIAGRAM**

The ideal case would be for you to have your own power curves for your CPUs, for your application and for your BIOS settings. We recommend looking at tools such as TODO and TODO if this is a direction you want to explore.

A very rudementary soltion is to use a generic power curve and the [Thermal Design Power (TDP)](TODO) of your CPU. This is a common approach but also deeply flawed, you won't be able to detect important differences between how different brands and configurations of the hardware perform better than others. Please don't assume that just because that's the approach we are taking in this course to mean that's an approach we recommend, it is convenient form a teaching perspective.

To estimate CPU energy consumption, follow these steps:

1. **Find an appropriate power curve** for the processor.
2. **Interpolate the curve** at your observed CPU utilization to determine the `tdp-factor`.
3. **Multiply the processor's TDP by the `tdp-factor`** to calculate estimated power draw.
4. **Multiply power by time** to get total **energy consumed**.

### Selecting a power curve

Finding a processor-specific power curve is ideal but often not practical, as this data can be hard to obtain. In most cases, people use a [generalized power curve from this article](https://medium.com/teads-engineering/building-an-aws-ec2-carbon-emissions-dataset-3f0fd76c98ac), which we’ll use here for convenience.

📖 Read more in the [Teads pipeline documentation](https://if.greensoftware.foundation/pipelines/teads/).

Visually representing the above using the teads power curve.

We interpolate off the curve the tdp-factor for a cpu utilization of 80% =~ 0.95

We multiply that tdp-factor by the tdp of the CPU, in this case let's say it's 205 W.

0.95 * 205 = 194.75 W

To get energy from the above we multiply by time, in this case we were running at 80% utilziation for 1hr

194.75 * 1hr = 195.75 Wh

So the energy consumption for running at 80% utilization for 1 hrs on our CPU is approx 195.75 Wh.

**TODO - IMAGE**

#### Implementation

Let's begin with what we know, how to induce memory utilization into energy. We'll copy across the config from previous modules for this:

> [!NOTE] 
> Hightlighted lines denote the config to induce `memory-utilization` to `memory-energy`.

```yaml
name: sci-walkthrough
description: This manifest file computes the carbon per visit for our website
initialize:
  plugins:
    # highlight-start
    energy-from-memory-utilization:        
      method: Coefficient
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        input-parameter: memory-utilization 
        coefficient: 0.00039                
        output-parameter: memory-energy   
    # highlight-end
tree:
  children:
server-1:
    defaults:
      cloud-region: West UK    
      cloud-instance: "Azure Standard A2m_v2"
      cloud-provider: Azure      
    pipeline:
      # highlight-start
      - energy-from-memory-utilization
      # highlight-end
    inputs:
    - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
      duration: 3600      
      site-visits: 550
      cpu-utilization: 80
      memory-utilization: 8  
```

Next we need to induce the `cpu-utilization` to an intermediate value called `tdp-multiplier`.

As described in the methodology you need to interpolate `cpu-utilization` against the power curve of your CPU. We'll use the generalised "teads" power curve which - when generated several years ago - was the average across a range of CPUs.

In the `builtins` library, you can find the `Interpolate` plugin which we can use to implement the above. You’ll name the output `tdp-multiplier` as it is really an intermediate value that needs to be multiplied with the processor TDP to yield the CPU power.

```yaml
...  
    tdp-multiplier-from-cpu-utilization:  # <1>
      method: Interpolation               # <2>
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        method: linear
        x: [0, 10, 50, 100]               # <3>
        y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02]       # <3>  
        input-parameter: cpu-utilization  # <4>
        output-parameter: tdp-multiplier  # <5>      
...
```
- <1>: The name of this model.
- <2>: We are using the `Interpolation` plugin from the builtin standard library.
- <3>: These are the details of the power curve.
- <4>: Which input variable to load the cpu utilziation from.
- <5>: Which output parameter to publish the tdp multiplier to.

We now need to multiply

YOU ARE HERE ----> **HMMM HOW HARD IS IT TO GET THE TDP... WRITE THE MANIFEST FILE!**





Let's adjust the context in our previous IMP files so they now calculate `operational-carbon` instead of `carbon`.

```yaml
name: server-carbon
description: minimal demo
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    energy-from-memory-utilization:        
      method: Coefficient
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        input-parameter: memory-utilization 
        coefficient: 0.00039                
        output-parameter: memory-energy     
    sum-energy:                            
      path: "builtin" 
      method: Sum                                
      config:
        input-parameters:         
          - memory-energy
          - cpu-energy
        output-parameter: operational-energy    # <1>        
    carbon-from-energy:       
      method: Coefficient
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        input-parameter: operational-energy     # <2>        
        coefficient: 163
        output-parameter: operational-carbon    # <3>        
...       
```
- <1>: renamed `energy` to `operational-energy`
- <2>: renamed `energy` to `operational-energy`
- <3>: renamed `carbon` to `operational-carbon`

If we execute the IMP file now it would return this in the outputs:

```yaml
outputs:
    - timestamp: 2023-08-06T00:00
        duration: 3600
        memory-utilization: 8.8
        operational-energy: 0.003432
        operational-carbon: 0.559416
```

## Embodied Carbon

The virtual machine you are using is an `Azure Standard A2m_v2`. [This instance has](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/new-av2-series-vm-sizes/) 2 VCPUs, 16 GB memory, a 20 GB SD and no GPUs.

The plugin initialization is extremely simple - you do not have to provide any config data at all unless you want to override some default settings, which you don’t here. You can simply add the following to your `initialize: plugins:` block:

```yaml
initialize:
  plugins:
		embodied-carbon:
		  path: builtin
		  method: SciEmbodied
```

Then the following information can be added to your input array (or you could add it to `defaults` with the same effect.

```yaml
inputs:
	- vCPUs: 2
	- memory: 16
	- SSD: 1
```

This is all that is required for the `SciEmbodied` model to run. It will add the total embodied emissions for the server to the output data using the name `embodied-carbon`.

## Operational & Embodied

Now that you have two components that sum to give the total carbon (operational and embodied) you should rename your existing `carbon` parameter to `operational-carbon`. This means the name `carbon` is freed up for the sum of operational and embodied carbon.

You can add an instance of `Sum` to sum together the embodied and operational carbon components:

```yaml
sum-carbon-components:
  path: "builtin"
  method: Sum
  config:
    input-parameters:
      - operational-carbon
      - embodied-carbon
    output-parameter: carbon
```

## SCI

There is only one more step to calculate the SCI score. You must choose a suitable functional unit and divide your total carbon by it to yield SCI.

Let’s say your application is a website. A suitable functional unit would be unique visits per day. This gives an idea of how carbon efficient your application is, as reducing the SCI score means reducing the carbon emitted by each user. 

You can simply add `site-visits` to your input data, let’s say there were 550 visits. In a real application, this information could come from a service like Google Analytics.

Now, add the SCI builtin to your set of plugins. You have to specify your functional unit in the plugin config, as follows:

```yaml
sci:
  path: "builtin"
  method: Sci
  config:
    functional-unit: site-visits
```

Add `sci` to the component pipeline, and you’ve completed your end-to-end SCI IMP! Now all that’s required is to run it and view the results. 

```yaml
name: memory-utilization-to-carbon

description: two-step demo
tags:
initialize:
  plugins:
    memory-to-energy:
      method: Multiply
      path: builtin
      config:
        input-parameters: [memory-utilization, memory-coefficient]
        output-parameter: memory-energy-kwh
    energy-to-carbon:
      method: Multiply
      path: builtin
      config:
        input-parameters: [energy, carbon-intensity]
        output-parameter: operational-carbon
    interpolate-power-curve:
      method: Interpolation
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        method: linear
        x: [0, 10, 50, 100]
        y: [0.12, 0.32, 0.75, 1.02]
        input-parameter: "cpu-utilization"
        output-parameter: "tdp-multiplier"
    tdp-multiplier-to-power:
      method: Multiply
      path: builtin
      config:
        input-parameters: ["tdp-multiplier", "tdp"]
        output-parameter: "cpu-power"
    power-to-energy-kwh:
      method: Divide
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        numerator: cpu-power
        denominator: 1000
        output: cpu-energy-kwh
    sum-energy-components:
      path: "builtin"
      method: Sum
      config:
        input-parameters:
          - memory-energy-kwh
          - cpu-energy-kwh
        output-parameter: energy
    embodied-carbon:
      path: builtin
      method: SciEmbodied
    sum-carbon-components:
      path: "builtin"
      method: Sum
      config:
        input-parameters:
          - operational-carbon
          - embodied-carbon
        output-parameter: carbon
    sci:
      method: Sci
      path: "builtin"
      config:
        functional-unit: site-visits
 
tree:
  children:
    component-1:
      defaults:
        vCPUs: 2
        memory: 16
        SSD: 1
      pipeline:
        compute:
          - memory-to-energy
          - interpolate-power-curve
          - tdp-multiplier-to-power
          - power-to-energy-kwh
          - sum-energy-components
          - energy-to-carbon
          - embodied-carbon
          - sum-carbon-components
          - sci
      inputs:
        - timestamp: 2023-08-01T00:00
          duration: 3600
          memory-utilization: 8.8
          cpu-utilization: 80
          tdp: 205
          memory-coefficient: 0.00039
          carbon-intensity: 163
          site-visits: 210
```